Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Daryl Lane. One of the most honored and respected of
today's science fiction authors is the English writer Brian Aldiss. His first
science fiction story was published in 1954, and since then he's won every award
the field has to offer, both in this country and throughout Europe. Aldiss is a
craftsman of the highest order. The attention he gives to style, character, and
structure demonstrates the literary polish that often distinguishes British
science fiction from American. He's written a few non-science fiction novels, in
fact, that have been bestsellers in England. We asked him why he chose to
concentrate his career in science fiction rather than mainstream literature.
Well, I regard myself as a writer, and this difference that seems to be so
apparent to other people is not so apparent to me. I'm interested in a kind of
literature of ideas, and sometimes that strays to one side of the science
fiction fence and sometimes to another. But it's not as though one day I'm
riding a horse and the next day I'm riding a cow. It's just that I'm in the same
vehicle all the time, but sometimes the identification marks change. That's the
way I see it. In some of his personal essays on science fiction, Aldiss tells of
how he was introduced to the field as a child through lurid pulp magazines he
found at Woolworths. His family disapproved of his reading such literature, but
Aldiss was fascinated and wouldn't give it up. He explains why he was so drawn to
science fiction at an early age. I believe it was really that I never had a firm
conviction as a child that the world was as all the grown-ups claimed it to be.
It seemed to me that it was a much more interesting place than any of them
believed, or that they sought to deny it was an interesting place at all. They
were all busy working in their shops and making their money and leading their
routine lives. And I was a bit of a kind of escapologist, you see, when I was a
child. I picked up a phrase from an old cowboy movie where one of the wrestlers
says out of the corner of his mouth, Let's go while the going's good.
Aldiss's streak of wildness later led to unique experiments in some of his
science fiction novels. He gained a reputation as an innovator, as a science
fiction author who wasn't afraid to introduce new styles and concepts into a
fairly traditional field. Two good examples of his innovative techniques were
the novels Report on Probability A and Barefoot in the Head, published in the
late 60s. Their complex styles were avant-garde and confusing to many science
fiction readers. We asked Aldiss if he deliberately sought to open up science
fiction or enlarge its boundaries with such experiments. Well, you understand
that's not exactly a motive in writing to expand the field. I think what you
think you're doing at the time is trying to find a little... How shall we mix
the metaphor? Trying to find a little breathing space where the ground isn't too
trampled already by the hordes of other writers. And so you seek out, I suppose,
the perimeters of the field as it's currently defined. And in that way, if you
accidentally extend it well, that's very nice. And of course, some people are
grateful to you and other people are very cross with you for doing it because
they say you're breaking the rules. Next time, we'll talk with Brian Aldiss about
some of his works.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science
Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. In 1973, Brian Aldiss published a book on the
origin and history of science fiction entitled Billion Year Spree. He gave us an
interesting account of the reasons he wrote the book, including some comments on
one of his novels, Barefoot in the Head. Well, I'd written a novel called
Barefoot in the Head, and it really didn't receive a very kind initial
attention, although the premise was simple enough. Barefoot in the Head was
about the world stopped in its tracks by drugs. This was the late 60s, remember,
when the flower power people had been around and we had had all this love-in
stuff. And towards the end of the 60s, the bills, as we say in England, the
checks were coming in for all that kind of stuff. And they were already finding
the fetuses in the trash cans of Haight-Ashbury. So that Barefoot in the Head
was an ambivalent book written in a difficult language. But I poured into it all
I knew about A, science fiction, and B, writing. And I was a little surprised at
the tepid response it got, the angry response it got, the anonymous letters. So
I thought, well, let's be finished with the science fiction field. And I
thought, well, before I leave it, I ought to write down all that I know and love
about it before I forget. And so really I settled down with that in mind, to
write Billion Year Spree, and also to have an argument as I raised my hat and
left the science fictional community. But by the time I got to the end of the
thing, you know, three years had passed, and just writing the book turned me on
to science fiction again. Billion Year Spree is full of Aldiss's personal but
fascinating ideas. One provocative idea, heresy to some science fiction fans,
was that Hugo Gernsback, the father of modern science fiction, was a disastrous
influence on the field. We asked Aldiss what he meant by that. Well, as you
probably know, that I did say something of that sort. And since then, people
have been threatening to break my legs and my arms and shoot me and hang me and
kick me out of the science fiction field and all sorts of things like that. But
I guess that what I was worried about was the way science fiction was segregated
by Gernsback into a magazine. So if you wanted to find science fiction, you had
to go to a magazine that had a name like Astounding or Amazing or Staggering,
which had a huge three-dimensional title with rivets in it. And that resulted in
a monoculture. And we all know that there are dangers in monoculture. And I
simply thought that science fiction would be better as an uncaged animal that
could rove at large where it would. But nowadays, people complain that science
fiction is segregated and that people think you're funny if you read it and that
it has to have a special place in a bookshop right next to weirdo cult books
about flying saucers or whatever. Well, my answer to that is that, yes, I agree.
I think that's too bad. I think science fiction is much better than that. But
the reason why it is there is because of the segregation that was introduced by
Hugo Gernsback. That was my argument. Anyone seeking to gain a perspective on
science fiction and fantasy should read Billion Year Spree, a personal but
fascinating account of the field by one of science fiction's true men of
letters. Tomorrow more with Brian Aldiss.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. Brian Aldiss does unexpected but fascinating
things in his science fiction stories. Though Aldiss is often an innovator, he
also understands and cherishes the traditions of science fiction. Aldiss has
demonstrated his fondness for science fiction's past by redoing some of its
classic novels. An Island Called Moreau, for instance, was based on H.G. Wells'
The Island of Dr. Moreau. In his book, Frankenstein Unbound, drew on Mary
Shelley's Frankenstein, published in 1818, which some call the first science
fiction novel. Aldiss relates the impulse behind his writing of Frankenstein
Unbound. I think that I write about the things that fascinate me most. And I'm
kind of a literary man. And I certainly much admire Mary Shelley's Frankenstein.
It's the most remarkable work for anyone, not least for a young lady not quite
touching 18. And when I had the impulse to write Frankenstein Unbound, it was
really an exegetical impulse to draw everybody's attention, if possible, to the
excellence of that original novel, which, as you know, has been slandered and
pilloried by the filmmakers who've seen nothing better in it than a stupid,
shambling, and inarticulate monster. I wanted to restore the monster to his true
evil power as an articulate, feeling and maimed being worthy of our compassion
and perhaps our hatred.
Aldiss says there was a true creative impulse behind Frankenstein Unbound. But
that wasn't so for An Island Called Moreau. I have to admit that later on I did
the same thing with Wells' Island of Dr. Moreau. And that was, I believe, ill
-advised. It's one of the few novels I've written that didn't begin with some
kind of genuine lust
to create, will to create, with fire in my stomach. I just thought it was
something I could do. And that was too tiny a motive, I believe, for the book
that I eventually turned out. But I don't believe that it supersedes or in any
way aids the Wells version. The funny thing is, I have to say, that that novel
was extremely well received in this country and in Great Britain. Another Aldiss
tribute to science fiction's past is his novella, The Saliva Tree. It's a
playful book, a clever tribute to H.G. Wells, who happens to be an unseen
character in it. It's about an invisible alien monster ravaging the countryside
of late Victorian England. Invading monsters and invisibility are two of Wells'
themes, of course. And during the story, all of Wells' themes and the titles of
his books are somehow worked in. The story's main character, Gregory Rolles, has
been writing letters to H.G. Wells about the happenings in the countryside.
Wells comes to meet Rolles as the story ends. Well, in H.G. Wells, our central
character is about to relate to H.G. Wells the horrific events that have gone on
down on the farm. and in those events are really the germs for all of Wells'
science fiction. I mean, you know, there's a kind of a joke on H.G. Wells there.
I mean, we all owe a great debt to H.G. Wells because he preempted almost all of
the science fiction themes and so in a way The Saliva Tree is a kind of horrific
joke to show that in fact Wells didn't have any original ideas. They were all
given to him by this guy who knocks on the door at the end of the story. More on
the works of Brian Aldiss next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. English science fiction author Brian Aldiss
sometimes writes books which are difficult to categorize. Aldiss has written
familiar science fiction, such as his first novel, which was published in this
country in 1959, as Starship. But many of his novels are experimental or avant
-garde in both theme and structure. Report on Probability A, published in 1969,
is a good example of this type. A 1976 novel, though, the Malacia Tapestry, is
one of his most unique novels, a strange but richly rewarding book. And it
completely resists categories. It could be called science fiction, but it's not
quite that. Some might say it's fantasy, but it's not that either. Aldiss talks
about the inspiration behind the book. The model I had was a pictorial one.
That's often the case... Well, in several of my novels, I start from a pictorial
beginning. And my pictorial beginnings with Malacia were the etchings which the
Italian artist, the Baroque artist, GBT Epilo, made at the end of his life.
Towards the end of his life, he retired, and he started etching these mysterious
little pictures of wizards,
Mountebanks, soldiers,
punchinellos, people being dug out of the ground from graves, owls, serpents
burning on altars, all sorts of mysterious symbols in these lovely little
pictures. And no one's actually figured out what they're meant to be. It's like
a science fictional alternative world where magic rules, I suppose you'd say,
and I suppose that was one of the things I liked about them. So I thought, well,
if no one else can reconstruct this world to their satisfaction, I'll have a go
at it. And so I started writing short stories around the more haunting of these
etchings of Tiepolo's. Malacia itself is a grand city which exists in what
appears to be an alternate universe suggestive of Earth's ancient past. There is
no technology to speak of, sorcery of a limited sort seems to work, and there
are all manner of exotic creatures such as flying beings which resemble humans.
The novel's main concern is art, an unusual theme for a science fiction or
fantasy book, seemingly more appropriate for a romantic poet. Aldiss told us
that the theme of art came out of a serious illness he had while writing the
book. The effect of this internal complaint I had, this hepatitis,
made me feel that, well, my lifespan was limited, and I'd frolicked about a good
deal and had written some books that I perhaps didn't take as seriously as I
should do, and that what I dearly loved was writing, and that I wanted to make a
statement about art. And really, Malacia is, it's all about art from the title
onwards. If the book has a power, it is the power of meditations on the nature
of art, which is at once to transfigure and at the same time to petrify. And as
you know, Malacia itself is a city-state under a curse of zero change. Well,
that's like a work of art. It's like Tiepolo's little etchings. They may be
forever enigmatic to us, but they're forever unchanging. The Malacia Tapestry,
by one of the masters of modern science fiction. A difficult novel to
categorize, but a fascinating one to read. More with author Brian Aldiss on our
next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. Brian Aldiss' latest science fiction novel is
the masterful achievement of an author who is at the height of his very awesome
powers. It's called Helliconia Spring, and it's the first volume of a trilogy
about an Earth-like planet called Helliconia. Aldiss tells us about the planet and
the books. Helliconia is the name of a planet that's really much like Earth, and
a lot of Earth-like things go on there. But it is the child of binary suns, and
it takes two and a half thousand years to go around the primary. I mean two and
a half thousand Earth years.
Which is to say that between one winter and the next, you can have a whole lot
of civilizations doing a whole lot of declining and falling. And of course,
falling and rising. And so that these three long volumes really just cover parts
of one of Helliconia's great years. So there's at once this marvelous continuity,
as I see it, of one year, and yet of many generations and many cultures. And
that's the basic plan of the book. They're simply titled. The first one's
Helliconia Spring. That's the one that's out. The one I'm writing is Helliconia
Summer. And after that, I go on to Helliconia Winter. After centuries of a
deadening winter, spring is coming to Helliconia. And the primitive men of the
planet are waking up to the greater possibilities of life. To higher aspirations
and knowledge. To the construction of a new civilization. The first volume
traces the life of a nomadic hunter named Yuli and his descendants. Because the
first volume's about the sun bursting out. The first volume is just stacked full
of things bursting out. And people bursting out. Animals bursting out. It's a
great bursting out novel.
Circling Helliconia is a satellite from Earth. A huge observation station which
monitors everything that happens in Helliconia and beams it to Earth. Aldiss
spent a painstaking four years on the book, striving for accuracy and realism.
Well, I hope people will find that it's full of reality. That's why I say the
moral of it should be mere existence. Because I think they'll recognize their
own lives passing through the book. And the other motive I had was that I grew
rather alarmed at the way so much science fiction, since it's become more
popular, has been full of, what shall we say, fantasy, wish fulfillment. I
didn't like that. I think that science fiction should reflect the facts of life.
The hard facts of life. It shouldn't just be some nonsense about one guy against
a malign empire who goes out and, you know, kills the chief baddie. I thought it
should have a little more contact for reality. And moreover, I'll sound old
-fashioned if I say this, but I think that sort of thing is better for the
nation's youth than the old hogwash about telepathic dragons and all the rest of
it.
Helliconia Spring is a remarkable and unique achievement by a man who is not just
a great science fiction writer, but one of the finest writers of our time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.